>> Welcome to the
Haskell Weekly podcast.
This is a show about Haskell, a purely
functional programming language.
I'm your host Taylor Fausak.
I'm an engineer at ITProTV.
With me today is Cameron Gera,
one of the engineers on my team.
Thanks for joining me today, Cam.
>> Thanks for having me
Taylor, I'm excited about today.
I think, uh, last couple of weeks for
a Haskell Weekly and interviewing some
incredible people in the community.
And, uh, today we have something, you
know, back back more to our roots,
what we're used to, what we do day
in and day out, which is a look at
one of the, um, articles from the
past edition of Haskell weekly.
And then we dissected and
jumped in a little bit.
Um, today I'm really excited because,
you know, we've covered a lot of
Michael Snoyman's articles before.
Um, and we're going to cover another
one today, but this one is honestly
was a little brain stretching for me.
And so I'm excited to kind of ask some
questions I had from it and get some
clarity, um, you know, as well as just.
Bounce ideas around with you.
Um, but today's article is titled Haskell
base proposal, unifying vector like types.
So we're going to just
dive right in, right?
>> Yeah.
And as you mentioned, it's by
Michael Snoyman, who we frequently
talk about on this podcast.
Uh, but in relation to this discussion
today, I think one of the reasons
this is even coming up again is that,
Michael Snoyman is involved with
the Haskell Foundation, particularly
kind of the more tech side of it.
And, uh, this is a proposal to
augment or change the base library
to have like a common vector type
that everything else can use.
So I think that's a little bit
of the broader context under
which this article was published.
>> Yeah.
And I think, you know,
that, you know, his.
Kind of focus and driving force is just
to like help drive that technical agenda
for the Haskell Foundation and really
find a way to make the quality of life
of Haskell a little easier, um, you
know, and kind of clear up some of the
confusion about, you know, boxed versus
unboxed, pinned versus unpinned memory.
Uh, what vector is, why there's so
many different types and you know,
all the variety of libraries we
have for them and like, what does,
what, and what's the side effects.
So I think he like really dove in deep.
Um, and so I'm looking
forward to diving in.
>> Yeah, it's a lot to
cover, so we better get started.
And I think, uh, again, to contextualize
just a little bit more actually, before
we get in, is that one of the goals of
the Haskell Foundation is to increase
like, uh, industrial or commercial
adoption of Haskell and try to find some
of those things that could be warts or
paper cuts that new people may run into
and minimize those as much as possible.
And one of the motivations for
this discussion is strings.
And it's a common meme or complaint about
Haskell that there's, you know, five
string types you have to care about.
And that isn't really true.
There's string from the prelude,
which is a linked list of characters,
which is a pretty bad representation.
And then there's text, which is
kind of the de facto library for
representing textual data in Haskell.
Um, and often byte string gets involved
in the mix there because you can
represent strings as byte strings, but
you lose some information there cause
you don't know what encoding it is.
Uh, anyway, uh, just, just to
contextualize, that's like the main
motivation here, I think, but behind
the scenes, regardless of, you know,
what you do with strings, they need
to be represented in memory somehow.
And that's what, this is more focused on.
>> Right.
And so, you know, you've talked about
string being that meme wart thing
that, you know, because it's the only
textual basis in the base library.
Right?
>> Yeah.
Uh, in the prelude and in the base
library, the string type is really
the only choice and so much of the
base API uses strings as input or
output because it's the only choice.
Somewhat recently, like, I don't know,
in the past couple of years, um, the
text library has become a wired in
library for GHC, which means that when
you install GHC you get text for free.
So that has helped and that's made it
more available, but it's still not like
actually in base or better yet in the
prelude where you don't even have to
import anything to be able to use text.
>> Yeah, yeah.
And I know we've, we've
struggled against that.
We've have our own custom prelude now
that has that, you know, available to us.
Um, but what, what is kind of the and
you know another kind of thing going on?
Um, That's like related to
like all these options, right?
Everything.
There's so many options with
different libraries and everything.
Um, but nothing really shares
anything behind the scenes.
It's all different representations.
>> Right.
So that's the key point here.
So like, like I've just mentioned,
string is a linked list of characters and
linked lists are baked into the language.
You could write your own, but
there's one in the language.
So a lot of people use that.
Uh, but linked lists
have a lot of downsides.
They aren't very compact in memory
and they're not easy to iterate over
or rather they're easy to iterate
over, but you might get a lot of
cache misses along the way, and they.
Aren't good at random
access or mutation in place.
So that's why there are
other options for this.
The most popular one is
probably byte string.
So if you wanted to represent just a, you
know, a bunch of memory in your program,
you're probably gonna use a byte string.
Um, but it's not the only option.
You could also use the vector package,
like a vector of Word8 Uh, values
or you could use the array package,
which is part of the Haskell language
report, like the language standard,
but it's also not a very good library
In a lot of ways vector is just
the array library, but done better.
Um, and then there are
a lot of other options.
Um, but those, those are the main players.
Uh, and maybe another one that's
it's worth mentioning at this
point is the foundation library.
Not to be confused with
the Haskell foundation.
Organization.
Um, but there's a library
called foundation and it has
a sub library called basement.
And that contains a lot of these more
primitive array, vector like types.
So it's got one of these as well.
>> Gotcha.
So you talked about, you know,
byte string and vector Word8 being
quote-unquote like synonymous.
Um, but you know, in the article
he talks to that byte string
is a pinned foreign pointer.
Um, you know, what does that
mean for someone who hasn't.
A lot.
It doesn't have a lot of
programming knowledge or they're
still learning the ins and outs
of pointers and stuff like that.
>> Yeah, so pinned is.
A, um, property of the memory that
GHC will allocate for this thing.
And what pinned means is that if you
need to call out to C or just call,
call out to anything through Haskell's,
FFI the foreign function interface.
Then if your memory is pinned, that means
that the garbage collector won't move it
around, which means if you hand a pointer
off to some C program through the FFI.
That C program knows that that pointer
isn't going to move, which is really
useful because it's probably going to
want to do something with that pointer.
Um, and of course the other, uh,
you know, the alternative is to use
unpinned memory, which the garbage
collector is free to move around.
And, um, you may wonder why would you
want to use pinned versus unpinned memory?
Like I mentioned, if you're
making an FFI call, you probably
need pinned Um, but another.
Or, or one of the downsides of pinned
memory, I guess the reason you don't
use pinned memory everywhere is that
since the garbage collector can move
stuff around, it can, uh, compact
your heap or, uh, you, people may be
familiar with this back in the old days
when we had spinning rust hard drives,
uh, defragmentation where you may have
a bunch of small files all scattered
over your hard drive and you can.
Pack them all together, real
close next to each other.
And, um, then you end up with
more contiguous free space.
And in this case, I'm
talking about GHC's heap.
Um, and that's beneficial because then
if you need to allocate a big chunk
of memory, you can do that rather than
having to, you know, scan over all of
your available heap or, or whatever.
I don't know too much about garbage
collection, but that's my, my
understanding of what's going on here.
>> Yeah, no, I think that
was a, a great explanation.
Um, you know, it makes sense why we'd
want pinned for the FFI because if that
pointer points to something that's not
there anymore, then we're really, uh, Sol.
So, you know, it makes sense
for, for that situation.
And I think, you know, the
idea of unpinned memory that
allows the garbage collector to.
Sort of organize the memory
more or less, um, is great.
Cause then yeah, that big giant heap
or not, it's not actually a heap
of memory, but this chunk of memory
that needs to be allocated no matter
what the size can generally be found,
because everything isn't in the way.
>> yes.
And it's worth noting that the
byte string library provides a
type that uses unpinned memory.
And that type is called short byte string.
This I haven't seen this used very
often and compared to the like data dot
byte string API, that's exposed, the
short byte string exposes very little.
It effectively lets you convert
in and out of normal byte strings.
And then just kind of keep it around.
So I think the intent is to use this for
like, uh, interned strings that other
programming languages use or like symbol.
And I don't know, just something that
you really only need a reference to.
You don't want to do anything with it.
>> Okay.
Yeah.
>> Um, what kind of kicked off
this discussion was, uh, we were
talking about vector also and the other.
Representations for this
stuff behind the scenes.
So I mentioned that byte string is kind
of the same as a vector of Word8 And
I think maybe a reasonable question is
why isn't it that, you know, we have
this vector library, why isn't byte,
string, just a wrapper around that.
And that's the crux of a Snoyman's post
here is that maybe it should be right.
>> Maybe it can just
be a new type wrapper.
>> Yeah.
Um, but in order to do that, we need
to solve this pinned versus unpinned
problem, because vector is unpinned I
think, um, I should check that, but I
think it's unpinned and, uh, yeah, so
that's one reason why it's not there.
And the other reason, or one other reason
is that, um, vector is a little expensive
to compile and isn't a wired in library.
So the GHC team.
Can't just like depend on it, Willy
nilly that, so it's a big deal
to get a new library involved.
>> Right.
I mean, yeah, and Snoyman said Like
the factor package itself is huge,
so it takes a long time to compile.
Um, yeah.
And, and kind of to your point of vector
being unpinned um, I know it's, I don't,
I can't remember if pinned or unpinned but
I do know it's boxed or unboxed, which.
I don't know exactly what those mean
So I'm going to ask you a second
with those mean, but my hypothesis
of what those mean is the boxed is a
range of memory in which it exists.
And then unboxed is kind of, it's just
wherever it wants to be within the heap.
>> Um, I think that's close.
So again, I, I'm not too versed in the
details here, so I may get it wrong.
But my understanding is that boxed is what
we think of for normal Haskell data types.
Um, like, and I guess maybe most
people don't think about the memory
representation of data types.
day to day I know I, that, that
I don't, but, uh, boxed means
that box means that it's like a.
Uh, pointer to some struct
that has all the fields on
it that you're interested in.
Uh, and sometimes there's
only one field on the thing.
So like a boxed Word32 is a pointer.
To a 32 bit unsigned
integer, somewhere in memory.
Um, and the alternative unboxed means
that there is no pointer, so it's
just stored directly on the thing.
There's no indirection there.
Um, and this is important when you're
trying to write high performance stuff
with arrays because if you want to
iterate over an array or a vector or
whatever, if it's boxed every time
you get to a new element, you have
to chase another pointer and go to
somewhere else in memory and get it.
Whereas, if it's unboxed, you
can just loop over, you know,
one contiguous chunk of memory.
And this is very good for cache hits.
So your CPU will load like, you know, that
line of memory into it's cache and you'll
just rip over that thing super fast.
>> okay.
So it's, I was a little bit
backwards maybe then on my
>> yeah.
So box is like, quote, unquote,
normal for Haskell where.
Everything is like a
pointer to somewhere else.
Um, and unboxed is it's
stored right there.
You don't have to chase
down a pointer to get to it.
>> Okay.
Yeah.
And then what about, um, so
there's also different types of
vectors store, like there's just
vector there's storable vector.
And then there's like, obviously unboxed
vector, which we kind of talked about it
>> yeah.
And this is something that
Snoyman wants to try to clear up.
Uh, he doesn't have a very.
Concrete proposal for this, but if you
go poke around with the vector package,
you'll see that there's data dot
vector data dot vector dot unboxed dot.
Storable mutable.
Like there's lots of different variants.
And I think that contributes
at least a little bit to why
this takes so long to compile.
There's a lot of code because this
stuff gets duplicated and it would be
nice if we could have one thing, just
data dot vector, and that can be boxed
or unboxed, or it could be pinned or
unpinned, or it could be storable or
primitive or any of these kinds of
varieties, because really the interface
should be the same for all of those.
And behind the scenes.
We either may not care how it's
represented or we want it to
automatically pick the most
efficient representation for us.
And I, my understanding is that
with Haskell's type system right
now, that may not be possible.
Uh, and I can't remember the
specifics, but I know that when you
go to unboxed, you are unable to
do certain things and everything
behaves a little bit differently.
Uh, the main thing I can think of
right now is that like lazy values.
I don't think can be unboxed or rather if
you have an unboxed value, it's not lazy
because if it's not a pointer to somewhere
else, that means you have that value.
So it hasn't, it has to
>> It doesn't just
live in a thunk anywhere.
It's it is evaluated and available.
Okay.
Yeah, that makes sense.
And I think, um, there's something
that you said just a second ago
and now it's escaping me of course.
Uh, but the, wow.
I really can't remember, but anyways,
we'll keep moving on the, um,
You know, underlying vector type.
Now I remember what it is, uh,
that, you know, existing vector
types now have really complicated
and convoluted instances for like
boxed or unboxed or, and such.
Um, because it's, it's not.
Necessarily trivial to
create those things.
I know I wouldn't, I haven't looked at
a type signature, so I don't know, but
I would most likely have a hard time
developing a instance of that thing.
Um, because it's dealing with
memory, it's dealing with things that
are just kind of, you know, it's.
It's behind the curtain, right?
So it's, you know, you have this pretty
view of what Haskell is, and then you
have to put, you know, if you pull
back the curtain, you'll say, Oh,
okay, this is how all these things are
represented in memory and how they all
work together, how GHC manages them
all, how the garbage collector does
things, you know, that's something I
haven't had necessarily a ton of time
to dive into is the behind the scenes.
Um, and so I think this was
a great kind of step, um, for
me to get into that direction.
Um, and I appreciate Snoyman taking
the time to kind of just share.
Um, you know, some of the thoughts and
feelings, um, and then you also being
able to explain a little bit of the
>> Yeah, hopefully
I've done a good job.
And there's one other thing
that I want to touch on.
Um, that is one of those
behind the scenes things.
Uh, if you've ever looked at the
documentation for data dot text or data
dot vector, you may have noticed in a lot
of places, it says subject to fusion and.
Yeah, that, uh, if you aren't
already familiar with fusion,
those may be a little cryptic.
Like, what does that mean?
Is it good to be subject to fusion?
Is it bad?
Should I want these functions
or should I avoid them?
Um, and to give a high level
overview, uh, fusion is where you
may have a pipeline of operations
that you apply to something and.
It would be expensive to like
take your input and apply the
first change and then take, you
know, produce an output from that.
And then use that as the
input to the second thing.
And you'd have all of these intermediate,
uh, text values or vectors or
whatever, and fusion is where you
fuse all of those things together.
Hence the name.
Um, and I bring this up because
this is one of the, or let me answer
the questions I posed earlier.
I guess fusion is good.
And you want to use functions that.
Are subject to fusion.
Um, but it can be very difficult to
tell when that works or when it doesn't
work and text and vector both have
their own fusion mechanisms behind
the scenes and they are different.
So one of the upsides potential
upsides of unifying these vector
like types is to have one fusion
mechanism behind the scenes.
Or alternatively have no
fusion mechanism at all.
And instead rely on some type of streaming
library, a la pipes or conduit to do
that fusion more explicitly for you.
Um, so that's a super quick overview
of fusion, but I wanted to bring it
up because, um, one of the kind of
gotchas with text and vector is that if.
All of your functions fuse together.
You can get really good performance, but
if you accidentally miss fusion somewhere
along the way, then your performance can
tank, which is very difficult to debug.
>> Hmm.
Hmm.
Yeah, it sounds a little tricky, a
>> Yes.
Yeah.
Um, but yeah, so I just wanted
to get that in as a quick note.
Um, but yeah, overall, um, Again, the
point here is we have all these different
representations of bytes really byte
string versus vector or whatever.
Um, let's have one and then everything
else can build on top of that.
>> Yeah, and include
it in base so we can get rid
of the uses of string in base
>> Yes, that would be great.
And so many people
>> Yeah.
The first comment on the blog post uh
comment section was, Oh, I'm so glad
you want to get rid of string in base
>> yes so
>> be, it can stay in base, but it
shouldn't be the base, uh, data type, you
>> yeah.
And like you mentioned earlier, cam
uh, for us as application authors,
we can, we're in kind of a better
spot because we can just say we're
going to use text everywhere and.
Most libraries have a text based
alternative that you can use, or you
can reach for an alternative prelude
entirely like relude by  Kowainik that
uses text pretty much everywhere, I think.
Or there are other alternatives too.
Um, but as a library author, if you
want your package to be used in as
many places as popular or as possible,
you probably want to depend on the
smallest number of things as you can.
So, if you don't really need text,
then you may not depend on it.
In which case, your only
choice is to use string.
And then that just perpetuates
using string everywhere because
you know, if somebody else wants
to write, so I'll write a library
that integrates with yours, they
are kind of forced to use string.
So it's a
>> Sounds like it.
Yeah.
And I mean, as you speak of Kowainik I
wanted to do a quick little shout out
to them for developing the, uh, They
created a diagram of Haskell ideas
and things to learn over time and kind
of the difficulty of those, um, you
know, on a, on a scale, like a graph.
So it's really cool.
It's in this week, week's edition
of Haskell weekly, which I think
is episode or, uh, edition 255
Um, so you can find it there.
It's a really cool, like, Just kind
of visual, um, and GHCJS is the
hardest and longest thing to learn.
So, you know, we talked about
that last week, so it's, you know,
everything's so related yeah, just
wanted to do a quick shout out there.
for that
>> Yeah, I thought that
was really well put together.
And like you mentioned, it's sort
of a two-dimensional graph of these
concepts in Haskell and how they
relate, uh, in difficulty and kind
of when you may be exposed to them.
So if you feel like you're
looking for something new to
learn about Haskell, you could.
Find, you know, kind of the edge of where
you are and pick one of those things.
That's just beyond it.
Or if you feel like, you know, everything,
you could look back and say like,
wow, I learned this thing way sooner.
than I should have.
>> right.
Yeah.
I mean, it's good to just kind
of see what's out, what's out
there that you may not know.
Um, or be like looking at me,
I'm a ball Haskell baller.
If you're a Haskell
baller, please call us.
We would love to, uh,
give you an opportunity.
>> for sure.
Um, so yeah, I think I've said
everything I wanted to say about,
uh, this shared vector, like type I'm
sure that, um, I've messed some things
up, but those are the broad strokes.
I encourage listeners
to go read this post.
It's good.
And go discuss it on the
Haskell discourse if you've got
opinions, which I'm sure you do.
>> no, I think that's it.
I think that it was uh overall great.
Um, to kind of dive into this, even
though it was a little brain melty for
those who aren't as technically savvy.
Um, and haven't looked
behind the curtain enough.
Uh, but I do think, yeah, but I do think
it's, you know, really really great
knowledge and something that, you know,
I think the foundation will continue to
think about and yeah, GHC contributors
and all that, will kind of really evaluate
and look at, you know, um, is this
being something they seriously consider?
>> agreed a hundred percent.
All right, well, uh, that
will do it for us this week.
Thank you so much for listening
to the Haskell weekly podcast.
I've been your host Taylor Fausak And
with me today was Cameron Gera You can
find out more about Haskell Weekly at
our website, which is HaskellWeekly.News
If you enjoyed the show, please rate
and review us wherever you found us.
And if you have any feedback
for us, you can tweet us.
Our handle is HaskellWeekly
>> And Haskell weekly is brought
to you by ITProTV an ACI learning
company and also our employer.
They would love to extend an offer of 30%
off the lifetime of your subscription.
Uh, all you gotta do is go to ITPro.TV
purchase, or you can even start a
free subscription if you're skeptical.
Um, all you gotta do is purchase.
And at checkout, if you use.
Promo code HaskellWeekly30 you will
get that 30% off and you can see
it, um, in the checkout process.
Um, but I think that about does it for us.
Thanks for joining us on the Haskell
Weekly podcast and see you next week!